README.md, before:

# Provision Pragmatically and Programmatically with CloudFormation

How many times have you gazed upon the list of services that Amazon is providing
through their Amazon Web Services (AWS) family of products and felt an
unpleasant mixture of anxiety and confusion? If you're anything like me, it
would be literally _every time_ you visited their website. While I was one of
the first in my circle of software developer friends to get on board the Elastic
Compute Cloud (EC2) train, I haven't been great at keeping up with new
developments. This year, I decided, would be the year that I get back on track
and sort out this alphabet soup of cloud virtualization technology.

After clicking around at random and reading an unwholesome amount of bland
introductory pages, I finally started to get an idea of how I should try to put
all of these pieces together. The first thing I figured out: 

> It is way, way too hard to get everything up and running by clicking a bunch
> of buttons.

What are your goals? For me, it's to be able to deploy a web-based application
for one of my clients. As a corollary, I want to be able to entirely scrap a
web-based application for one of my clients (maybe it's been replaced, maybe
they've hired another consultant). In effect, that's two goals. Plus I would
like to keep all of my clients separate, I don't want changes to a firewall rule
to effect all of my clients, just the one client who's willing to take the risk.
If you think about it, keeping things isolated will also make it easier to
figure out who we can charge for what services at the end of the month; we
should also tag these resources in a way that makes sense. That's four goals and
that's only what we've thought of so far.

* Provision resources for a project
* Retire resources for a project
* Isolate resources for a project
* Report on resources by project

Looking at these goals, the number of services, the way many of them build on
each other... It all becomes clear that the answer is automation. Of course,
Amazon provides an automation tool: [CloudFormation][0].

## Install the AWS Command Line Tools

Amazon provides a goofy drag-and-drop interface for CloudFormation, but that
runs kind of counter to the whole point of this article. You can also write your
CloudFormation template and then upload it via their web interface, I think
that's also a little clunky. My recommendation is that you install the [AWS
Command Line Tools][1]. Amazon also provides packages for Windows, but if you're
working from within the Windows environment you might be more interested in the
[AWS Tools for PowerShell][2] which do much the same thing but, you know, with
[]PowerShell][3].

This is kind of a power tip, but if you're managing more than one Amazon account
or dealing with more than one region, you can [configure profiles][4] to make
that process easier.

With one of these tools installed and properly configured, you can invoke
CloudFormation directly from your console window! `:-)`

## Start Your New CloudFormation Template

In the world of CloudFormation, the document you are writing is called a
"template". I believe it's referred to as a template because one template can be
used to create many different sets of resources. For instance, in this tutorial
we're going to be writing a template that will provision a web server and a
database server; we can use the template to provision as many of these
web-and-database-server pairs as we might lock, all independent of one another.

You can write your template in [YAML][5] or [JSON][6], if you're writing it by
hand (as we are right now) then I _strongly_ recommend that you write it in
YAML. I know, I know, YAML isn't everyone's favorite but getting all of the
ending braces and brackets lined up in a JSON document is it's own kind of
mental torture. You deserve better, trust me: don't do that to yourself.

Anyway, we're going to start off with a description and a parameter. A
parameter, as you may have suspected, is a value that we can supply when we are
actually using our template to provision something.

```yaml
Description: Provisions a simple cluster with a web and a database server

Parameters:
  KeyPairName:
    Type: String
    Description: Name of keypair used when provisioning instances
```

Some decisions are best postponed until the absolute last minute and parameters
are here when you have decisions to postpone. When we decide to provision our
resources, we can provide the name of the EC2 key pair to use at that time.

I'm not going to go into a big discussion about how to manage your EC2 key
pairs. Maybe you have one per person who has access to provision instances.
Maybe you have one per client. However you manage it, you can pass it in when
you provision resources.

We need at least one resource in order to provision our template. For this
project we're going to create our own [Virtual Private Cloud][8] (VPC) to hold our
resources. This will keep things isolated from everything else you have might
have deployed to AWS.

```yaml
Resources:
  TutorialVPC:
    Type: AWS::EC2::VPC
    Properties:
      CidrBlock: "10.6.0.0/25"
      EnableDnsSupport: true
      EnableDnsHostnames: true
      Tags:
        - Key: "Name"
          Value: "Tutorial VPC"
```

The `Resources` section of the template will contain a stanza for each of the
resources we provision, this will be the bulk of the template. Each stanza in
this section will start with the name of the resource (`TutorialVPC`), we can
use this name when we need to reference the resource while creating other
resource (for instance, when we add subnets to this VPC). After the name we need
to declare the `Type` of resource: every CloudFormation resource has a type,
they are all clearly documented in the [CloudFormation API Documentation][7]. In
the example above we are creating a new [VPC][9] instance. Next we set the
`Properties` for our resource, the values provided here will be particular to
each resource. Most resources accept a `Tags` property but not all, if you set
`Tags` on a resource that doesn't support that property CloudFormation will
throw an error.

Every VPC needs a block of IP addresses, we set this with the `CidrBlock`
property and provide [a non-routable network with 254 available addresses][10].
I chose a network that won't conflict with the address range I use at home or at
work, this is important if you ever want to use [a Virtual Private Network (VPN)
to connect your Amazon VPC to your own network][11], perhaps to make access to
these resources easier.

We'd like Amazon to continue to assign names to our instances, so we set the
`EnableDnsSupport` and `EnableDnsHostnames` properties to true. Lastly we set
some tags on our resources to remind ourselves why we provisioned them in the
first place.

## Provision Resource With Your Template

With our template set, we're ready to use it to provision some resources! When
we provide the template to CloudFormation, we also have to provide our parameter
values and we have the opportunity to tag the provisioned resources (maybe be
client or project or both).

Go ahead and run the command below to being provisioning. When CloudFormation
sets up all of the resources it links them together into a "stack". Once
complete, you can deal with the stack as one unit. The stack name provides a
human-friendly handle for all of the related resources.

```shell
aws cloudformation create-stack \
  --stack-name tutorial \
  --template-body file://template.yaml \
  --parameters ParameterKey=KeyPairName,ParameterValue=cloudfront-tutorial \
  --tags Key=Project,Value=cf-tutorial
```

As soon as CloudFormation receives the template it will return a new `StackId`
with the Amazon Resource Name (ARN) for the stack, you will have to wait a bit
for the stack to finish being provisioned. You can check on your stack through
the [CloudFormation web console][12], some resources take longer than others,
CloudFormation will ensure they are created in the right order and work out the
dependencies. This template should move along pretty quickly as we aren't
provisioning much. 

I broke the command over several lines to try and make it easier to follow.
We...

* Ask the AWS tools to call out to CloudFormation with the "create-stack"
  command
* Set the name of the stack we are creating to "tutorial"
* Provide our template to CloudFormation with the ``file:///` URL
* We set the one template parameter, `KeyPairName` (note the weird way we have
  to set parameters)
* We provided a one tag key and value that CloudFormation will use to tag all of
  the provisioned resources
  
If you have multiple parameters, you can separate them with a space. If you have
multiple tags, you can separate them with a comma. It's weird, I don't know why
they aren't uniform.

When provisioning is complete, you can head over to the [VPC web console][13] to
inspect your new resource. There's not a lot to see, but if you choose "Your
VPCs" from the left-hand navigation bar and then select your "Tutorial VPC" from
the list, you can click the "Tags" tab and look at the tags associated with the
resource. You'll see the tag we specified in the template (`Name`) and the tag
we passed into the `create-stack` command ('Project'). CloudFormation also set
several tags of it's own, linking the resource to the stack.

As we work through the template, we might update the stack or delete it
entirely. The command to update the stack is almost exactly the same.

```shell
aws cloudformation update-stack \
  --stack-name tutorial \
  --template-body file://template.yaml \
  --parameters ParameterKey=KeyPairName,ParameterValue=cloudfront-tutorial \
  --tags Key=Project,Value=cf-tutorial
```

Deleting the stack is quite a bit shorter.

```shell
aws cloudformation delete-stack \
  --stack-name tutorial \
```

If CloudFormation runs into any problems while creating or updating your stack,
it will roll back to the last valid state of the stack. If this happens during
the creation of the stack you'll end up with no resources at all, if it happens
during an update then it will be as if your update attempt never occurred.

### Retaining Resources through Stack Updates and Even Deletion

As much as CloudFormation can, it will try to preserve resources between
updates. On the other hand there are some changes that can't be made after
provisioning: in those cases CloudFormation will delete the resource and create
a replacement. For many things this doesn't really matter, but for things like
instances or Elastic IP addresses you may really _need_ to retain those
resources. The [CloudFormation Documentation][7] is pretty clear on what
resource updates can be performed without "service interruption", keep your eyes
open for those warnings.

You can also set a `DeletionPolicy` for the resources in your template. This
lets you signal to CloudFormation that, for certain resources, you would like to
keep the resource (even if a replacement is required for provisioning) or (if
the resource support it) perform a "snapshot" backup before deleting the
resource (i.e., EC2 volumes or RDS instances). That said, even with the deletion
policy set for your critical resources, you should think hard about updating
them after provisioning the stack.

My recommendation is that you leave the deletion policies out of your template
while you are working on it. Wait until you feel pretty good about the
template, maybe until the point where you're ready to deploy your application or
project. When you reach that point, go back and set the deletion policy to
`Retain` on those things that are truly critical (volumes with data on them,
instances you've customized heavily, etc.)

------
[0]: https://aws.amazon.com/cloudformation/
[1]: https://aws.amazon.com/cli/
[2]: https://aws.amazon.com/powershell/
[3]: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/scripting/overview?view=powershell-6
[4]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/cli-configure-profiles.html
[5]: https://yaml.org/
[6]: https://www.json.org/
[7]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/APIReference/Welcome.html
[8]: https://aws.amazon.com/vpc/faqs/
[9]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/aws-resource-ec2-vpc.html
[10]: http://jodies.de/ipcalc?host=10.6.0.0&mask1=24&mask2=
[11]: https://aws.amazon.com/premiumsupport/knowledge-center/create-connection-vpc/
[12]: https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloudformation
[13]: https://console.aws.amazon.com/vpc

Commit message:

Added some text about how great deleting stacks can be!

README.md, after:

# Provision Pragmatically and Programmatically with CloudFormation

How many times have you gazed upon the list of services that Amazon is providing
through their Amazon Web Services (AWS) family of products and felt an
unpleasant mixture of anxiety and confusion? If you're anything like me, it
would be literally _every time_ you visited their website. While I was one of
the first in my circle of software developer friends to get on board the Elastic
Compute Cloud (EC2) train, I haven't been great at keeping up with new
developments. This year, I decided, would be the year that I get back on track
and sort out this alphabet soup of cloud virtualization technology.

After clicking around at random and reading an unwholesome amount of bland
introductory pages, I finally started to get an idea of how I should try to put
all of these pieces together. The first thing I figured out: 

> It is way, way too hard to get everything up and running by clicking a bunch
> of buttons.

What are your goals? For me, it's to be able to deploy a web-based application
for one of my clients. As a corollary, I want to be able to entirely scrap a
web-based application for one of my clients (maybe it's been replaced, maybe
they've hired another consultant). In effect, that's two goals. Plus I would
like to keep all of my clients separate, I don't want changes to a firewall rule
to effect all of my clients, just the one client who's willing to take the risk.
If you think about it, keeping things isolated will also make it easier to
figure out who we can charge for what services at the end of the month; we
should also tag these resources in a way that makes sense. That's four goals and
that's only what we've thought of so far.

* Provision resources for a project
* Retire resources for a project
* Isolate resources for a project
* Report on resources by project

Looking at these goals, the number of services, the way many of them build on
each other... It all becomes clear that the answer is automation. Of course,
Amazon provides an automation tool: [CloudFormation][0].

## Install the AWS Command Line Tools

Amazon provides a goofy drag-and-drop interface for CloudFormation, but that
runs kind of counter to the whole point of this article. You can also write your
CloudFormation template and then upload it via their web interface, I think
that's also a little clunky. My recommendation is that you install the [AWS
Command Line Tools][1]. Amazon also provides packages for Windows, but if you're
working from within the Windows environment you might be more interested in the
[AWS Tools for PowerShell][2] which do much the same thing but, you know, with
[]PowerShell][3].

This is kind of a power tip, but if you're managing more than one Amazon account
or dealing with more than one region, you can [configure profiles][4] to make
that process easier.

With one of these tools installed and properly configured, you can invoke
CloudFormation directly from your console window! `:-)`

## Start Your New CloudFormation Template

In the world of CloudFormation, the document you are writing is called a
"template". I believe it's referred to as a template because one template can be
used to create many different sets of resources. For instance, in this tutorial
we're going to be writing a template that will provision a web server and a
database server; we can use the template to provision as many of these
web-and-database-server pairs as we might lock, all independent of one another.

You can write your template in [YAML][5] or [JSON][6], if you're writing it by
hand (as we are right now) then I _strongly_ recommend that you write it in
YAML. I know, I know, YAML isn't everyone's favorite but getting all of the
ending braces and brackets lined up in a JSON document is it's own kind of
mental torture. You deserve better, trust me: don't do that to yourself.

Anyway, we're going to start off with a description and a parameter. A
parameter, as you may have suspected, is a value that we can supply when we are
actually using our template to provision something.

```yaml
Description: Provisions a simple cluster with a web and a database server

Parameters:
  KeyPairName:
    Type: String
    Description: Name of keypair used when provisioning instances
```

Some decisions are best postponed until the absolute last minute and parameters
are here when you have decisions to postpone. When we decide to provision our
resources, we can provide the name of the EC2 key pair to use at that time.

I'm not going to go into a big discussion about how to manage your EC2 key
pairs. Maybe you have one per person who has access to provision instances.
Maybe you have one per client. However you manage it, you can pass it in when
you provision resources.

We need at least one resource in order to provision our template. For this
project we're going to create our own [Virtual Private Cloud][8] (VPC) to hold our
resources. This will keep things isolated from everything else you have might
have deployed to AWS.

```yaml
Resources:
  TutorialVPC:
    Type: AWS::EC2::VPC
    Properties:
      CidrBlock: "10.6.0.0/25"
      EnableDnsSupport: true
      EnableDnsHostnames: true
      Tags:
        - Key: "Name"
          Value: "Tutorial VPC"
```

The `Resources` section of the template will contain a stanza for each of the
resources we provision, this will be the bulk of the template. Each stanza in
this section will start with the name of the resource (`TutorialVPC`), we can
use this name when we need to reference the resource while creating other
resource (for instance, when we add subnets to this VPC). After the name we need
to declare the `Type` of resource: every CloudFormation resource has a type,
they are all clearly documented in the [CloudFormation API Documentation][7]. In
the example above we are creating a new [VPC][9] instance. Next we set the
`Properties` for our resource, the values provided here will be particular to
each resource. Most resources accept a `Tags` property but not all, if you set
`Tags` on a resource that doesn't support that property CloudFormation will
throw an error.

Every VPC needs a block of IP addresses, we set this with the `CidrBlock`
property and provide [a non-routable network with 254 available addresses][10].
I chose a network that won't conflict with the address range I use at home or at
work, this is important if you ever want to use [a Virtual Private Network (VPN)
to connect your Amazon VPC to your own network][11], perhaps to make access to
these resources easier.

We'd like Amazon to continue to assign names to our instances, so we set the
`EnableDnsSupport` and `EnableDnsHostnames` properties to true. Lastly we set
some tags on our resources to remind ourselves why we provisioned them in the
first place.

## Provision Resource With Your Template

With our template set, we're ready to use it to provision some resources! When
we provide the template to CloudFormation, we also have to provide our parameter
values and we have the opportunity to tag the provisioned resources (maybe be
client or project or both).

Go ahead and run the command below to being provisioning. When CloudFormation
sets up all of the resources it links them together into a "stack". Once
complete, you can deal with the stack as one unit. The stack name provides a
human-friendly handle for all of the related resources.

```shell
aws cloudformation create-stack \
  --stack-name tutorial \
  --template-body file://template.yaml \
  --parameters ParameterKey=KeyPairName,ParameterValue=cloudfront-tutorial \
  --tags Key=Project,Value=cf-tutorial
```

As soon as CloudFormation receives the template it will return a new `StackId`
with the Amazon Resource Name (ARN) for the stack, you will have to wait a bit
for the stack to finish being provisioned. You can check on your stack through
the [CloudFormation web console][12], some resources take longer than others,
CloudFormation will ensure they are created in the right order and work out the
dependencies. This template should move along pretty quickly as we aren't
provisioning much. 

I broke the command over several lines to try and make it easier to follow.
We...

* Ask the AWS tools to call out to CloudFormation with the "create-stack"
  command
* Set the name of the stack we are creating to "tutorial"
* Provide our template to CloudFormation with the ``file:///` URL
* We set the one template parameter, `KeyPairName` (note the weird way we have
  to set parameters)
* We provided a one tag key and value that CloudFormation will use to tag all of
  the provisioned resources
  
If you have multiple parameters, you can separate them with a space. If you have
multiple tags, you can separate them with a comma. It's weird, I don't know why
they aren't uniform.

When provisioning is complete, you can head over to the [VPC web console][13] to
inspect your new resource. There's not a lot to see, but if you choose "Your
VPCs" from the left-hand navigation bar and then select your "Tutorial VPC" from
the list, you can click the "Tags" tab and look at the tags associated with the
resource. You'll see the tag we specified in the template (`Name`) and the tag
we passed into the `create-stack` command ('Project'). CloudFormation also set
several tags of it's own, linking the resource to the stack.

As we work through the template, we might update the stack or delete it
entirely. The command to update the stack is almost exactly the same.

```shell
aws cloudformation update-stack \
  --stack-name tutorial \
  --template-body file://template.yaml \
  --parameters ParameterKey=KeyPairName,ParameterValue=cloudfront-tutorial \
  --tags Key=Project,Value=cf-tutorial
```

If CloudFormation runs into any problems while creating or updating your stack,
it will roll back to the last valid state of the stack. If this happens during
the creation of the stack you'll end up with no resources at all, if it happens
during an update then it will be as if your update attempt never occurred.

Deleting the stack is quite a bit shorter.

```shell
aws cloudformation delete-stack \
  --stack-name tutorial
```

Go ahead and run that command now to delete the stack. The AWS tool command
won't return any results but if you switch to the CloudFormation console you
might catch a glimpse of the stack before it's entirely deleted. If you switch
over to the VPC console you'll see the new VPC is gone, it was deleted along
with the stack. 

In my opinion, this is a really nice way to work. You can edit your template and
work on getting all of the bits and pieces of your stack created and linked
together in a way that makes sense (provisioned in the VPC, in the correct
subnet, with the correct security group and policies, etc.) When you feel pretty
good about your work so far you can go ahead and provision. If there's a problem
or something isn't lining up the way it should you can simply delete the stack
and continue to work on your template. For me, this is far more convenient then
clicking through the various web consoles and trying to link everything up by
filling out fields or applying actions to all of the various pieces.

### Retaining Resources through Stack Updates and Even Deletion

As much as CloudFormation can, it will try to preserve resources between
updates. On the other hand there are some changes that can't be made after
provisioning: in those cases CloudFormation will delete the resource and create
a replacement. For many things this doesn't really matter, but for things like
instances or Elastic IP addresses you may really _need_ to retain those
resources. The [CloudFormation Documentation][7] is pretty clear on what
resource updates can be performed without "service interruption", keep your eyes
open for those warnings.

You can also set a `DeletionPolicy` for the resources in your template. This
lets you signal to CloudFormation that, for certain resources, you would like to
keep the resource (even if a replacement is required for provisioning) or (if
the resource support it) perform a "snapshot" backup before deleting the
resource (i.e., EC2 volumes or RDS instances). That said, even with the deletion
policy set for your critical resources, you should think hard about updating
them after provisioning the stack.

My recommendation is that you leave the deletion policies out of your template
while you are working on it. Wait until you feel pretty good about the
template, maybe until the point where you're ready to deploy your application or
project. When you reach that point, go back and set the deletion policy to
`Retain` on those things that are truly critical (volumes with data on them,
instances you've customized heavily, etc.)

------
[0]: https://aws.amazon.com/cloudformation/
[1]: https://aws.amazon.com/cli/
[2]: https://aws.amazon.com/powershell/
[3]: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/scripting/overview?view=powershell-6
[4]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/cli-configure-profiles.html
[5]: https://yaml.org/
[6]: https://www.json.org/
[7]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/APIReference/Welcome.html
[8]: https://aws.amazon.com/vpc/faqs/
[9]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/aws-resource-ec2-vpc.html
[10]: http://jodies.de/ipcalc?host=10.6.0.0&mask1=24&mask2=
[11]: https://aws.amazon.com/premiumsupport/knowledge-center/create-connection-vpc/
[12]: https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloudformation
[13]: https://console.aws.amazon.com/vpc
